Use exploration mode when the destination itself is unstable.
You may not know which problem matters, which explanation is true, or which opportunity is worth pursuing.
The goal is not immediate production.
The goal is to improve the map.
Ask the AI to widen and structure the space.
Generate competing hypotheses, search for disconfirming evidence, group unknowns, compare user segments, or reveal dependencies.
Good exploration produces contrasts, not just a longer list.
Human intensity remains high because relevance is contextual.
The agent can surface patterns, but you decide which signals matter, which sources are credible, and which question deserves the next hour.
Curiosity is guided, not outsourced.
Use an evidence board with four columns: what we think, what we observed, what would change our mind, and what we will test.
This keeps generated possibilities separate from verified facts and makes uncertainty visible.
The common failure is possibility theater.
More ideas create the feeling of progress while commitment keeps moving away.
Set a budget for time, sources, or experiments, and name the decision that exploration must support.
Exploration should end with a narrower question, a selected direction, or a test.
Then switch to asking for one missing fact, collaboration for shaping the solution, or delegation for running the test.
First, Explore before the destination is stable.
Second, Generate contrasts, evidence, and better questions.
Third, End exploration with a decision.